so I am currently holding a rock from
outer space if you couldn't tell it this
is me geeking out this is been geeking
out
so this rock actually comes from the
asteroid belt so the pop space between
like Mars and Jupiter where a lot of
asteroids come from compare that to this
little sample over here which is a
Martian meteorite I'm actually holding a
piece of Mars right now so this will
have been created when another rock hit
into the surface of Mars throwing up a
lot of fragments one of those fragments
ended up falling to earth and you can
get the same thing happening from the
moon as well so that you also get lunar
meteorites now unfortunately the Oxford
Natural History Museum where I am at the
minute doesn't have any Luna meteorites
you know sometimes but if you're
wondering well how do we tell what's the
difference between something that's
coming from the asteroid belts I mean
it's come from Mars and something it's
come from the moon in part it's all
thanks to the moon rocks that were
returned by the Apollo moon landings now
it's the 50th anniversary of the very
first moon landing on Saturday the 20th
of july 2019 and while that was one
giant leap for mankind
I think it's the scientific legacy of
the Apollo missions that really were
their crowning glory so the experiments
the astronauts did on the surface of the
Moon itself and then all the experiments
we did from the moon rocks and soil
samples that were brought back to earth
after the missions that have really
pushed the boundaries of humanity's
knowledge of our place in the universe
so all the news stories you're gonna
hear in the next week are gonna be about
that incredible achievement of Apollo 11
being the first mission to put humans on
the moon Neil Armstrong Buzz Aldrin
taking those first steps while Michael
Collins still pilots the command module
in orbit around the moon and yeah that
was an incredible achievement but I
really want to talk about this science
that was done off the back of the Apollo
missions so I've got five things for you
that we didn't know before the moon
landings
to Apollo 11 14 and 15 all left laser
retroreflectors on the surface of the
moon so that we could fire a laser at
the moon it would bounce back to us and
then from the time it took we'd be able
to calculate the distance now people
often refer to this as they left a
mirror on the surface of the Moon but
that's not quite right because the way a
mirror reflects light is very different
to how a retroreflector reflects light
example if I point this laser at an
angle at this mirror
it looks like the lasers going straight
through but in reality what's happening
it's is being reflected over the other
side it's reflected at the same angle as
the angle I'm pointing at the mirror not
ideal for leaving something on the
surface of the moon instead to get a
reflection back I have to point it
directly at it and apparently give
myself a laser mustache in the process
if instead I pointed this laser at a
retroreflector
a bike reflector you'll see that
whatever angle I point the laser out it
always gives me a reflection back in the
direction it came and that is ideal for
leaving on the moon to put it into
perspective though of every hundred
million billion photons in the lasers
pointed at the retroreflectors left on
the surface of the moon only one makes
it back to earth so this is really
precision science here so you'd never be
able to see the laser coming back with
the naked eye unfortunately but what
it's allowed us to do is actually
measure that the moon is moving away
from us every single year by about 3.8
centimeters which is intriguing to say
the least and this is all happening
because of the time the difference in
the force of gravity on the earth and
the moon which is causing sort of like a
drag force which is slowing down the
rotation rate of the earth but about
like two milliseconds a century or
something and then at the same time
causing a moon to move away from the
earth
so the rate that it's moving away from
the earth and the distance that it
currently is that kind of gives you an
age on the moon if you sort of wind back
time it gives you an age of about one
and a half billion years and yet the
oldest rock we've ever found on the moon
is over four billion years old so we
think that it's actually faster now than
it was in the past but we'll come back
to that later
so the two and a half hours or so that
Neil and Buzz walked on the surface of
the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission
they placed a seismometer on the surface
ie device that could detect seismic
waves ie moon quakes the same as we have
seismometers on earth to detect
earthquakes and that was to enable us to
figure out what the interior of the moon
was actually like and they did that by
using seismometers that were placed by
later Apollo missions in different
locations on the moon's surface which
sort of joined together to make this
network to pinpoint the distance and
location inside the moon that these moon
quakes were coming from and you can do
that because seismic waves travel deeper
through the interior the further away
they've come from and so you essentially
get a time delay on your network
depending on which direction or how deep
a moonquake has come from also these
waves get refracted when they move from
liquid to solid as well and so some of
the first results in this experiment
suggested the moon's interior could
actually be liquid and have this molten
magma interior just like the earth did
which wasn't really expected at all
because the moon is a very static object
we've never really seen it change at all
and so it was thought to be a very solid
lump of rock not only that but the
seismometer experiments reveal that the
moon also had an iron core just like the
earth however that iron core in the moon
was only about 25% of its radius
compared with the earth sighing core
which is about 54% of its radius the
earth actually is the densest planet in
the solar system because of that because
it's iron core is so big again this was
a weird result that people didn't really
know how to explain so another
experiment carried by Apollo 11 was the
solar wind composition experiment and
you might have seen this in the
background of a lot of the photos from
the Apollo 11 mission and wondered what
it was it was called the Swiss flag and
it was essentially a big sheet of
aluminium foil that was left exposed to
space to collect solar wind particles so
solar wind comes in the Sun it's
extremely high-energy particles that are
released in the interior when the Sun
gets a little bit too active now on
earth were shielded by those high-energy
schools because of our magnetic field
some of them do get funneled down to the
poles and we get the beautiful Aurora
the northern and the southern lights the
moon doesn't have a magnetic field so
it's completely unprotected which means
we can get a really pure sample of the
particles in the solar wind now it's
really important we understand this
because these geomagnetic storms can
essentially create a huge shockwave on
the magnetic field of Earth which can
put out electrical grids communication
networks satellites all of which can
have an impact on day-to-day life here
on earth so it's something we have to
understand in order to be able to
mitigate for so while that experiment
did allow us to better understand the
solar wind the other thing it allowed us
to do was to measure the total density
of all normal matter in the universe
which is a pretty big deal for a short
backyard hop to the moon and the reason
they could do that was they were able to
measure the ratio of deuterium to
hydrogen in the solar wind ie in the Sun
itself you know deuterium is something
we call heavy hydrogen and a normal
hydrogen atom you just have one proton
in the center of the atom but in
deuterium you also have a neutron as
well but there's no Astrophysical
process that we know can create
deuterium it's actually destroyed in
stars in order to make helium the only
time we ever know that deuterium was
actually produced was during the Big
Bang so then if you can measure the
amount you find today in stars you can
put a lower limit on the amount that was
actually created in the Big Bang but
that amount of deuterium is then
directly correlated with all the normal
matter you make in the Big Bang so if
you can measure the abundance of
deuterium now then you can infer the
total density of all normal matter in
the universe and so the solar wind
composition experiment of Apollo 11 gave
a value for that of 3 times 10 to the
minus 31 grams per centimeter cubed
compare that with a more recent
measurement this from 2001 which is
galaxies to probe it we found 4 times 10
to the minus 31 grams per centimeter
cubed the agreement between the
different methods is excellent it's
actually within 30 percent for all the
known methods to measure this and the
solar wind composition
experiment from Apollo 11 is one of them
so not just stuff about the moon Apollo
11 but stuff about the entire universe
as well
the lasting legacy of the Apollo
missions though is definitely the amount
of moon rocks and lunar soil samples
they brought back to earth with them 382
kilograms in total and I cannot stress
enough how valuable they are because
they provide this window into like
geological time where you've had no
effects of weather or erosion might you
do on earth so you can really pro the
very early days of the solar system the
oldest rocks we've ever found on earth
are in the range 3.8 to about 4.2
billion years but some of the rocks and
the Highlands found on the moon from
summer later missions have been dated at
4.4 billion years nearly every moon rock
is older than nearly every earth rock
the other big surprise was that most of
the moon's surface was made of igneous
rocks these are rocks made of big
crystalline structures that form when
lava cools and solidifies which tells us
that the moon was once molten so as well
as carbon dating the rocks to get an age
you can also measure something called
the oxygen isotope ratio an isotope is
essentially a normal atom that you've
added extra neutrons to the center up to
make it a bit heavier and that is often
then unstable as well as the
radioactively decay eventually back into
a normal oxygen atom and when they
measured the oxygen isotope ratio in
moon rocks
compared with in Earth rocks they found
they were exactly the same and
completely different from any other rock
in the solar system an asteroid
meteorite or a Mars meteorite so there
was a lot of people scratching their
heads over this but the final piece of
the puzzle came from the Apollo 15
mission in the discovery of a mineral
called olivine on the surface of the
Moon this is olivine it's a mineral made
out of iron and magnesium and you will
notice that it is green and this is not
the first time that I've held olivine
because it's also found on the surface
of the earth as well and in particular
in Hawaii so I got to go to Hawaii as
part of my PhD I was sent to observe
some galaxies using the telescope's
on the top of the mountain they're
mounted keigher and once I'd done all my
night shifts and I got back down to see
I decided to go snorkeling so in amongst
all the turtles and the fishes I got
very excited when I spotted some green
sand just like this sample here sand
essentially made of olivine and the
reason you find olivine in Hawaii like
that is because essentially the entire
Big Island of Hawaii is one huge giant
volcano and olivine is one of the most
common minerals found in the Earth's
magma ocean underneath it's cross so
anywhere you've got a volcano or
tectonic plates meeting you can dredge
up a lot of that olivine to the surface
that's really the only time you ever see
it so you can imagine the Apollo 15
astronauts surprise when they're just
casually driving the lunar rover and
they spark a green rock in amongst all
of the grey on the surface of the Moon
so that really confirmed the moon did
have a magma ocean just like the seismic
experiments have been suggesting and
that was because olivine essentially is
so much heavier than any of the igneous
rock you get at the surface that it
sinks to the bottom of that magma ocean
and so the purity of the olivine you
then get at the surface is there any
related to how deep your magma ocean is
and on the moon we find the magma ocean
is 600 miles deep which is essentially
half of the moon's radius to have a
magma ocean that large it means the moon
has to have formed incredibly quickly
and at one point been entirely molten
rock now the fact that you find both
olivine on the surface of the earth and
the surface of the Moon formed by the
exact same processes suggest that the
moon and the earth actually have a
common origin so before the Apollo
missions there was a couple of theories
floating around for how the moon might
have formed it could be that it was a
captured asteroid just like we saw in
Phobos and Deimos Mars is moons or it
could be that the moon and the earth had
formed from the same material at the
same time around the Sun and then there
was a pretty old theory that said the
moon could have formed after a huge
impact of something with the earth and
the very early solar system but people
had sort of dismissed that theory for
being well kind of too obvious sort of
too coincidental a bit of a just-so
story with all the findings of the
Apollo
mission that the moon is slowly moving
away from us that it was once molten and
now has a cross made of solidified lava
that it has a magma ocean still
underneath that cross with an iron core
that's much smaller than Earth's the
fact that it has the same oxygen isotope
ratio as Earth and that we find olivine
there and even that the Moon and Earth
are spinning in the same direction and
then the earth has this massive tilt
that causes our seasons every single one
of those results piled up and up in
favor of this giant impact hypothesis
first proposed by Reginald Alworth daily
in 1946 and finally then revisited by
Hartman and Davis in 75 and Cameron
award in 76 it would finally become the
accepted front-running theory for how
the moon informed after a conference in
1984 in Kona in Hawaii where the
participants met to discuss what was the
accepted theory now post Apollo and
there's reports of people walking around
shell-shocked because they couldn't
quite believe that the giant impact
hypothesis had come out on top the
general idea is that a mars-sized planet
that we called Theia collided with the
very early Earth in the early days of
the solar system that liquefied the
entire Earth and the entirety of fear
throughout all this molten rock into
space which was gradually brought back
into orbit around Earth that coalesced
to form the moon in a very short space
of times of less than a hundred years
then it cooled and solidified and ever
since then it's been gradually moving
away from us so Apollo itself has an
incredible scientific legacy along with
all the people that it inspired to do
PhDs in engineering physics computer
sciences and it's those people that are
now leading the missions where we send
probes to elsewhere in the solar system
as well now there's talk from many
countries about sending people back to
the moon but one thing's for sure is
that the Apollo landing sites should be
preserved as culturally significant
landmarks that shouldn't be disturbed
and instead preserved for all future
generations of space tourists to come
now if you want more historical and
scientific background on how we figured
out the giant impact hypothesis
was the leading theory for the formation
of the moon I cannot recommend this book
enough it's called the big splat this by
Dana Mackenzie and it is the book that
convinced me to be a scientist I
couldn't believe how incredible it was
that the pieces of the puzzle would all
come together from every single little
person's contribution to the field it
was like reading sort of a murder
mystery or a crime novel about how
scientists uncovered the evidence and
uncovered the truth and I guess that's
the biggest hope that I have for my book
that comes out in September as well is
that someone one day will also say that
it was the book that inspired them to be
a scientist who did you all know if I
won an award as well well it was for my
youtube channel it was the University of
Oxford Vice Chancellors public
engagement with research Awards which I
wouldn't have won if all of you weren't
watching my videos so this one's for all
of you thank you so so much I am forever
in your debt and this cold star trophy
that I got is amazing I kind of want to
make it into a necklace but I think it
would be a little bit excessive so maybe
I shouldn't
speaking of necklaces did you spot my my
crescent moon necklace which I thought
was very appropriate for this video
absolutely obsessed with this necklace
at the minute it's from purely I'll link
it down below absolutely gorgeous
Neil Armstrong Buzz Aldrin taking their
first steps on the moon while markable
Markel my name is Michael Collins you're
getting on well with Nick this one's my
favorite so go I didn't behold it the
other day it's amazing
you need to Hoover the dinosaurs and it
might interrupt filming
you